Changing your urostomy pouchUrostomy pouches are special bags that are used to collect urine after bladder surgery. The pouch attaches to the skin around your stoma, the hole that urine drains from. Another name for a pouch or bag is an appliance.
You will need to change your urostomy pouch often.
When to Change the Pouch
Most urostomy pouches need to be changed 1 to 2 times a week. It is important to follow a schedule for changing your pouch. DO NOT wait until it leaks because urine leaks can harm your skin.
You may need to change your pouch more often: 
During the summer
If you live in a warm, humid area
If you have scars or oily skin around your stoma
If you play sports or are very active 
Always change your pouch if there are signs that it is leaking. Signs include:
Itching
Burning
Changes in the appearance of the stoma or the skin around it 
Changing Your Pouch 
Always have a clean pouch on hand. You should always carry an extra one with you when you leave your house. Using a clean pouch will help prevent infections in your urinary system.
You can decide whether it is easier to sit, stand, or lie down when you change your pouch. Choose a position that allows you to see your stoma well.
Urine may dribble from your open stoma when you change the pouch. You can stand over a toilet or use rolled up gauze or paper towels below your stoma to absorb the urine.
When you remove the old pouch, push down on your skin to loosen it. DO NOT pull the pouch off your skin. Before you put the new pouch in place:
Check for changes in how your skin and stoma look.
Clean and care for your stoma and the skin around it.
Put the used pouch in a sealable plastic bag and throw it away in the regular trash.
When you put the new pouch in place: 
Carefully place the opening of the pouch over your stoma. Having a mirror in front of you may help you center the pouch correctly.
The pouch opening should be 1/8th of an inch (3 mm) larger than your stoma.
Some pouches are comprised of 2 parts: the wafer or flange, which is a plastic ring that adheres to the skin around the stoma, and a separate pouch that attaches to the flange. With a 2-piece system, the separate parts can be changed at different intervals.
Alternative Names
Urinary pouch; Urinary appliance pasting; Urinary diversion - urostomy pouch; Cystectomy - urostomy pouch
References
American Cancer Society website. Urostomy guide. www.cancer.org/treatment/treatments-and-side-effects/physical-side-effects/ostomies/urostomy.html. Updated June 2, 2017. Accessed June 8, 2018.
DeCastro GJ, McKiernan JM, Benson MC. Cutaneous continent urinary diversion. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, eds. Campbell-Walsh Urology. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 98.
Review Date 5/31/2018
Updated by: Sovrin M. Shah, MD, Assistant Professor, Department of Urology, The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
