abnormalities-of-pregnancy-stillbirth
Antonette T. Dulay
By 
, MD, Main Line Health System

Stillbirth, by definition, involves death of the fetus; it increases the risk of death of the fetus in subsequent pregnancies (see High-Risk Pregnancy).
Fetal death during late pregnancy may have maternal, placental, or fetal anatomic or genetic causes (see table Common Causes of Stillbirth).


Type


Examples
Maternal
Acquired thrombotic disorders
Diabetes mellitus if uncontrolled
Preeclampsia or eclampsia
Sepsis
Substance abuse
Thyroid disorders
Trauma
Placental
Abruptio placentae
Intra-amniotic infection (chorioamnionitis)
Fetomaternal hemorrhage
Twin-twin transfusion
Umbilical cord accidents (eg, prolapse, knots)
Uteroplacental vascular insufficiency
Vasa previa
Fetal
Alloimmune thrombocytopenia
Chromosomal abnormalities
Fetal alloimmune or inherited anemia
Infection
Major congenital malformations (particularly of the heart or brain)
Nonimmune hydrops fetalis
Single-gene disorders
If a fetus dies during late pregnancy or near term but remains in the uterus for weeks, consumptive coagulopathy or even disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may occur.
Clinical evaluation
Tests to identify the cause
The diagnosis of stillbirth is clinical.
Tests to determine the cause of stillbirth include the following:
Fetal karyotype and autopsy
Maternal complete blood count (CBC) for evidence of anemia or leukocytosis
Kleihauer-Betke test
Directed screening for acquired thrombotic disorders, including tests for antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin [IgG and IgM], anti-beta2 glycoprotein I [IgG and IgM])
TORCH test (toxoplasmosis [with IgG and IgM], other pathogens [eg, human parvovirus B19, varicella-zoster viruses], rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex)
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR)
TSH (and if abnormal, free T4)
Diabetes testing (HbA1C)
Examination of the placenta
Often, cause cannot be determined.
Uterine evacuation if required
Routine postdelivery care
Emotional support
Uterine evacuation may have spontaneously occurred. If not, evacuation should be done using drugs (eg, oxytocin) or a surgical procedure (eg, dilation and evacuation [D & E], preceded by preabortion osmotic dilators to prepare the cervix, with or without misoprostol), depending on the gestational age.
After the products of conception are expelled, curettage may be needed to remove any retained placental fragments. Fragments are more likely to remain when stillbirth occurs very early in the pregnancy.
If DIC develops, coagulopathy should be promptly and aggressively managed by replacing blood or blood products as needed.
Postdelivery management is similar to that for live birth.
Parents typically feel significant grief and require emotional support and sometimes require formal counseling. Risks with future pregnancies, which are related to the presumed cause, should be discussed with patients.
There are many causes of stillbirth (maternal, fetal, or placental).
Disseminated intravascular coagulation may develop secondarily.
Do tests to determine the cause; however, the cause often cannot be determined.
Evacuate the uterus using drugs or D & E, and provide emotional support to the parents.
Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA (known as MSD outside of the US and Canada) is a global healthcare leader working to help the world be well. From developing new therapies that treat and prevent disease to helping people in need, we are committed to improving health and well-being around the world.  The Manual was first published in 1899 as a service to the community.  The legacy of this great resource continues as the Merck Manual in the US and Canada and the MSD Manual outside of North America.  Learn more about our commitment to Global Medical Knowledge.
