adrenal-disorders-overview-of-adrenal-function
Ashley B. Grossman
By 
, MD, University of Oxford; Fellow, Green-Templeton College
The adrenal glands, located on the cephalad portion of each kidney (see figure Adrenal glands.), consist of a
Cortex
Medulla
The adrenal cortex and adrenal medulla each have separate endocrine functions.
The adrenal cortex produces
Glucocorticoids (primarily  cortisol)
Mineralocorticoids (primarily  aldosterone)
Androgens (primarily dehydroepiandrosterone and androstenedione)
Glucocorticoids promote and inhibit gene transcription in many cells and organ systems. Prominent effects include anti-inflammatory actions and increased hepatic gluconeogenesis.
Mineralocorticoids regulate electrolyte transport across epithelial surfaces, particularly renal conservation of sodium in exchange for potassium.
Adrenal androgens’ chief physiologic activity occurs after conversion to  testosterone and dihydrotestosterone.
The physiology of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical system is further discussed elsewhere.
The adrenal medulla is composed of chromaffin cells, which synthesize and secrete catecholamines (mainly  epinephrine and lesser amounts of  norepinephrine). Chromaffin cells also produce bioactive amines and peptides (eg, histamine, serotonin, chromogranins, neuropeptide hormones).  Epinephrine and  norepinephrine, the major effector amines of the sympathetic nervous system, are responsible for the “flight or fight” response (ie, chronotropic and inotropic effects on the heart; bronchodilation; peripheral and splanchnic vasoconstriction with skeletal muscular vasodilation; metabolic effects including glycogenolysis, lipolysis, and renin release).
Most adrenal deficiency syndromes affect output of all adrenocortical hormones. Hypofunction may be primary (malfunction of the adrenal gland itself, as in Addison disease) or secondary (due to lack of adrenal stimulation by the pituitary or hypothalamus, although some experts refer to hypothalamic malfunction as tertiary).
Adrenal hyperfunction causes distinct clinical syndromes depending on the hormone involved:
Hypersecretion of glucocorticoids results in Cushing syndrome.
Hypersecretion of aldosterone results in hyperaldosteronism.
Hypersecretion of androgens results in adrenal virilism.
Hypersecretion of  epinephrine and  norepinephrine results in symptoms of pheochromocytoma.
These syndromes frequently have overlapping features.
Hyperfunction may be compensatory, as in congenital adrenal hyperplasia, or due to acquired hyperplasia, adenomas, or adenocarcinomas.
Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA (known as MSD outside of the US and Canada) is a global healthcare leader working to help the world be well. From developing new therapies that treat and prevent disease to helping people in need, we are committed to improving health and well-being around the world.  The Manual was first published in 1899 as a service to the community.  The legacy of this great resource continues as the Merck Manual in the US and Canada and the MSD Manual outside of North America.  Learn more about our commitment to Global Medical Knowledge.
